Vera, what do you think is the significance of the youth being here at this conference?
Um, I think it's significant that the youth is here today to recognize and be able to
have a discourse with, um, older writers that are here and people who are out in the community.
A lot of people that are here are teachers as well as writers.
And I think it's good to have some type of discourse with the youth that are out here doing something today besides it being in kind of like an
academic setting where it's like peer and teacher positions or something like that so they can like Just have an easy flowing like conversation or whatever.
Has there been a lot of dialogue between the elder literary folk and the young aspiring writers in your opinion?
Um, I actually don't think so.
No, I think it's, everything has been actually pretty much respectful and I was hoping to catch Jabari Asim today, actually, because he was going to talk
a little bit about hip hop and I wanted to hear what he had to say about that, the younger people and older people also.
Which is something we were discussing last night.
We just had a kind of like free for all back at the hotel where young writers and older writers actually
were reading their work and some people just came out of curiosity.
And that was a lot of people's main concern as to what was going on in terms of like discourse between and um, critical
critiquing of these older writers and what they had done and what we should be doing now and whatever, things like that.
Yeah, I thought that was a very special moment myself, uh, primarily because it was the first visible moment in which you did see, uh, these
young writers who have been reading, uh, Gwendolyn Brooks, you know, highly anthologized woman, uh, who have heard the, the, Older poets who have been on
the periphery like Kalamu, Yassalam, and Eskeetore, uh, to, uh, finally engage them on their work and their times, you know, the black arts movement.
And I think on some level, um, anticipating the need to, uh, define for them, uh, how poetry
is going to be received, uh, aesthetically in the community, um, functionally in the community.
And, in their own lives, you know.
I think it was also good, um, that they saw these people who are actually living writers as opposed to just being like on a page as well.
And seeing them be accessible to them, I thought that was a good thing.
Right.
Well, Dolores, so happy you could be here today.
I'm glad to see you too, Judith.
Tell me about the excitement that you're feeling.
about this wonderful conference in relation to what you yourself have, um, contributed to the world of poetry.
Well, I think it's sort of a milestone of, uh, in terms of literature in this country because if
you really think about it, uh, You'll never get together these many poets, these prominent poets, these kinds of
poets, these poets who are involved in this kind of thinking and movement again for probably another 30 or 40 years.
I mean, as we have it today.
Uh, Sam Allen and I were talking about that.
Saying what a celebration, it's really a celebration when it comes down to it.
And, uh, it's a privilege to be here with, with so many, uh, minds.
With so many people who feel talking about poetry is normal and natural.
Because I know in my environment, no matter, even in some places in the academia, how do you feel?
Some places in the academia, some people are very, very tender when it comes to poetry.
Um, so it's nice to be able to talk with people and be with people.
And I think it's making a contribution, not only to this community, but as it goes, probably, to the whole world of poetry.
How do you feel about it?
Well, you know, what's exciting to me is that, um, as I listen to the reading of the poetry, and I talk to people like yourself
and you know, I've interacted with Nikki Giovanni on several occasions, and of course with Sonia Sanchez.
What's, what's so exciting about today is that, um, I'm seeing poetry, in a way, become alive.
And, um, and it's sort of embodying, for me, Um, uh, everything that African Americans have been in the past.
the present and what they will be in the future.
So I think that's, you know, what's sort of, uh, exciting to me about being here.
And, you know, and as, uh, as I look at you and, and I've read a couple of the things that you've written and I think what, what has sort of
been impressive to me about having someone like you to dialogue with is how you use poetry to teach.
And I was wondering if you could speak to that for a few minutes.
Yeah, I, um, I know you're not talking about didacticism.
I know you're not saying that.
What I try to do is to, is to define a situation or people involved in situations.
And through that, to get the reader to look At himself or herself.
In other words, and I'm very involved in the spiritual nature of man.
And how our spirits overcome in the end.
How they survive and overcome in the end.
Um, that may be a teaching.
If somebody reads a poem and says, well, well, I'll give you a good example.
There was a woman who read from the Woman of Plums, Peggy and Killing.
And that's a poem about one of the slave women who kills her children rather than have them become slaves.
Um, this, this is the, you probably know it, the, the narrative of Margaret Garner.
And it was based on that narrative.
And I did a reading in Boston, and after I finished, this woman came up to me in tears, and she was a white woman.
And I said, you must be a mother.
She said, yes.
So you see, if poetry can move, uh, people into a, uh, a finer, a truer recognition of who they are and themselves, and get
them to renew themselves in some way, or spiritually renew themselves in some way.
That I, I, I think it works.
And I don't set out to do that.
Sometimes the poem takes me there and I just follow it.
You must have that experience.
I mean, it simply takes you there.
And if, and if you don't follow it, you are rejecting.
the muse or whatever you want to call it.
You're rejecting your own creativity.
But the poem takes me there.
That's why I get a little worried sometimes when people start defining poetry as political poetry or this poetry or that poetry.
One goes where the poem takes one.
And I think even when we talk of Gwendolyn Brooks, who I think is probably the finest, the greatest genius of us all
uh, her poems simply take you into yourself and bring you out again whole.
And it seems to me that's what I like to see poems do.
Now, whatever Definition, people want to give that.
If it makes them comfortable, fine.
But I don't think I'm in any of them.
In fact, Paul Breiman, when he first printed me, wrote on the back of my, my little chapbook, you can't put her in the category.
And I realized that's going to get me in trouble.
I said, since he wrote that, I said, it's going to get me in trouble.
But there it is.
How, how do you see that?
Do you, do you, do you see poetry?
People talked this morning about poetry as political.
Poetry as a political force.
Well, what do you think of that?
Well, you know, my response is, is, is pretty simple.
It can be a powerful political force, but I think that you have to allow it to take you wherever.
Yes.
And as long as you understand that poetry, of course, is an art form, and that it does transcend politics, as it were.
But if it takes you there and allows you to have a deeper understanding, political situation at that particular time, then it's done its job.
It has worked for you in that context.
Um, what struck me today, and I wondered what you thought about this, um, was of course, the, uh, speakers
um, uh, allusion to, of course, Ralph Ellison's work, The Invisible Man.
And I've never heard anyone, um, In a sense, extrapolate from his invisible, from Ellison's Invisible Man, what he did.
And I thought that, uh, when I found out that I was going to have this chat with you, I thought I'd love to get
your opinion on his, his, uh, analysis of what the Invisible Man has done as it speaks to the black community.
Or as he spoke to the black community.
Let me move into my experience and try to explain that through my experience.
When I read Ralph Ellison's The Invisible Man, I was overwhelmed by the art of the book.
Um, some of it leaning on, um, on, on poetry in many aspects.
But I was overwhelmed by the art of the book.
Until I went back, until I had an experience myself, in which I discovered what being made invisible is.
And that is through working in a largely white institution, where if you become something other than what
you are supposed to become, there is a way of making you invisible.
As a woman in a male world, There is a way of making you invisible, and it doesn't always come from the white community.
It can come from the black community, which Ellison tells us about in a few of those chapters.
Yes, it does.
Uh, I, I think what Ellison did for me was to give me a whole new experience of what this term
invisible means and how it relates to me, not only, not only as a woman, an African American movement, but as a human being.
Because no human being should be made invisible.
Absolutely.
And I think he makes that statement very, very powerfully.
Because remember, in The Visible Man, he, he gets, he gets blown away by his own people.
That's right.
Half the time.
So, I, I, I don't know whether
What message, can you then translate that into the message for, to, for the, for the contemporary black community?
What is it that we need to do?
It's obvious that, you know, we meet in some way the criteria for middle classness, whatever that means.
How can we use what Ralph Ellison tells us in The Invisible Man and the poetry of some of the people who are here
today, as well as your own writing, to connect with the black community?
How can we do that?
I think, first of all, we, and I sound like I know what I'm talking about, don't I?
I, I got a lot, a lot of living to do before I could even back up this answer I'm gonna give.
But I, I think, first of all, we have to learn how to empower ourselves.
And we empower ourselves by knowing our history, by, uh, networking, by bonding.
Uh, there is, there is so much, so much Out here, that allows us to separate from each other.
For, for, for reasons, for one reason or another.
And to allow what energies there are out here that wants, that want to see us separated and disinherited and invisible and unempowered.
These, these energies come in and do it very beautifully.
Take, uh, Toni Morrison's getting the Nobel.
Right.
And the, the backlash that came from her contemporary black, uh, uh, writers.
Why do you suppose that was?
But, I think it's, my mother used to have a phrase for that, if I dare say it.
Yeah, please tell us.
My mother used to say crabs in a barrel.
She used to say that we have not gotten away from the plantation, because in the plantation the master used to get the crabs.
People, some people to spy on other people and let them know what's going on and they, they were able to keep
their, uh, faith or keep themselves together was a desperate, desperate move.
Um, to some degree, we, some of us may still be there because we are being, uh, usurped or by the white community that does not want to see us empowered.
After all, if a black person receives a Nobel, that's a, that's empowerment, period.
That's empowerment.
I mean, probably the greatest you can get in literature.
And, and, if you can find people out here who are going to give a certain backlash, and And sort of make that person invisible.
Think of that, making a Nobel Prize winner invisible and using black people in order to do it.
And I, I don't know why we don't see through that except that our need to be noticed, our need to become visible is so great that we will buy
into that in order to make another Part of ourselves, and ourselves would be another person, invisible.
I think we've got a lot to learn, to answer your question, that we have to go into the schools, teach the children
make the children proud of their heritage, stop them from, you know, Toni Morrison said that we all wanted to forget slavery.
She said, um, blacks wanted to forget it because they wanted to put it behind us.
Uh, whites wanted to forget it because of the grief.
And she made the statement, I think, in Time Magazine.
She says she thinks we all have national amnesia.
Well, it's time we're done with that.
And we begin to do what the Jews have done with the Holocaust.
And let the world know that we are proud of what we did.
We, we rose up from one of the first holocausts in this country.
And, and became a very strong Powerful.
Yes, powerful people.
And I think we have to teach our children that.
Teach our children to be proud of that.
Teach them how to network.
You know, we say brother and sister.
But sometimes we don't really mean that.
And, and, and try to get our, our, our kids in a positive view of themselves, to like themselves, to
love themselves, through their history, and through other forms of education.
And, and of course through, through poetry.
Exactly.
Through poetry they can do that.
I think you've heard, I don't know, have you heard that, uh, Judith, that there are many young people who don't know of, of James Baldwin?
I live that every day.
I live it every day.
Yeah.
Historically black institution and I'm amazed at the number of young black men and women who have not had any exposure To black art as it were in any form.
Absolutely.
And that's why of course this Celebration you and I are experiencing today.
It's so important.
It's so important In fact that I was going to ask you where you were on how one could infuse This whole black literature experience into the existing
curricula in both the public or in the private, public and parochial schools that would allow not only black young men and
women to become empowered through their literature, but would allow our white brothers and sisters and Asian brothers
and sisters and Latino brothers and sisters to understand the African American experience through their literature.
Poetry.
Yes.
And I, and I wondered with your experience at Philip Exeter, which is one of the finest, uh, uh, uh, private schools in the country, Uh, did, were you able to use
poetry as a vehicle through which and by which your young students could then, in a sense, experience, um, black culture?
A small example, Gwendolyn Brooks poem of the life of Lincoln West.
That is an extraordinary poem about this young kid who is, and when Gwen reads it, she said he was ugly.
She really uses that word, ugly.
She reads this wonderful poem about this young kid who is ugly and, uh, whom everybody rejects.
And, and she goes through it all.
The mother, the teacher, everybody rejects him.
The teacher takes her to a, takes him to a, I mean the mother takes him to a film one day.
And this white man across the street.
The way he says to the, aloud to his girlfriend, Look!
That's a real one.
A real one.
Look at the nappy hair.
That's an original.
And at the end of the poem, the young boy says, works out proudly, he takes that insult and, and turns it into a celebration.
And he says, I am an original.
We read that at Exeter and I said, you know, we talked about what is an original.
We talk about all the original clothes they buy, all the money these clothes talk.
What does original mean?
Because basically, I'm ta you're talking to a bunch of kids, even though they are well off and whatnot, are having
the same kind of traumatic problems that most kids out here are having.
But here they see through a black child, and this black child's willingness to celebrate himself, how they can celebrate themselves.
That because that they're having almost the same problems.
And when that begins to connect, they It connects beautifully, because they say, Ah, a black kid is teaching me this, you know.
And, and, or a black woman is teaching me this.
Believe me, Gwen became very popular after that poem was taken, uh, uh, taught so many times.
She had been popular.
But what I'm saying is that you can use, as your question implies, does that make sense to you?
Yes, it does.
Very much so.
And I just want to say it was so fun chatting with you today.
And maybe you and I can continue this conversation another time.
I hope so, Julie.
We have to do that.
Yes.
Pinky, I'd like to ask you a variant on the question you ask in freshman composition
classes, and that is, when and why and how did you start writing poetry?
How did I start writing poetry?
Uh, I started writing poetry, I really came to poetry late in life because I was writing fiction although I hadn't gotten anything published.
But I had thought I wanted to be a fiction writer.
And then I discovered the, uh, person to whom this conference is dedicated, uh, Gwendolyn Brooks.
Uh, uh, I read her first book of poetry, Speed and Bronx, many years after it was published.
And I said, gee, that's what I want to do.
And I started writing poetry and I found out my temperament was more suited to that.
And I've been really dedicating all of my time now to writing poetry rather than, uh, venturing off into other media.
Okay.
But she was my, she was really my inspiration, Gwendolyn Brooks.
Wonderful woman.
I love her.
And she's from my city too, so I do too.
Share that love.
But you say your temperament was more suited.
Can you push that for me a little bit?
All right.
I suppose I was thinking, not only because I can deal with a poem, It's more, it's more confined.
It's more condensed.
Uh, I can write it while I'm sitting in the automobile.
Or I can write it as I have done, uh, between classes in my office.
At that time I was teaching at Southern University.
And I, I think as a fiction writer you'd have to be much more disciplined in doing something every day.
If you're gonna, if you're, if you're Writing a novel, for example.
And I just never, I taught for many, many years.
And my students were my priority.
And I just didn't have time to sit down and say I'm going to devote four hours or eight hours a day to that.
But also because I, uh, got a kind of an emotional, or a release, and a feel for writing a poem.
I always felt good when a poem was finished.
You see?
And so I suppose that's what I mean when I say my temperament was more suited to it.
Uh, it seemed to, to, uh, satisfy some inner thing inside of me that I, uh, evidently wanted to let out, wanted to surface.
Okay, that, that brings to mind two questions for me.
Um, the first has to do with form.
You said that the poetry is really brief and it allowed you to work in short time spans.
So, did you, do you do a lot of revising?
Or, um, in part two of that, after revision, is that the form of your poetry seems to be the short, clipped kinds of lines.
Uh, I, uh, don't do a lot of revising.
Depends on what you mean a lot, because it's a relative term.
Uh, but I do do some revising.
And whenever I do revise, it's always a matter of cutting down, sharpening the image.
You see, I'm an imagist.
Okay.
I'm very much concerned with the metaphor and the way something is said, the language.
Uh, as well as the content of what you have to say.
And, uh, when I'm first writing, Of course, I'm just putting down everything that comes into my head as fast as I can before I lose the idea.
Then I begin to cut down.
I begin to look at the imagery.
I begin to look at the words.
Uh, the concise meaning of words.
Uh, is the image a cliché?
Uh, is it, uh, does it have originality?
What kind of power does it have?
So when I revise, I'm always looking for, I'm revising in terms of technique and style.
I've already said what I want to say.
You know, the thought is there, but I'm concerned with then the use of language.
Alright, and the thought seems to be, I, I was looking at some of your poems before I came to the conference and um, there's a new
volume out that our library happened to have and I cannot call the name of it, right at the, Girl at the Window.
Girl at it is, Girl at the Window.
And I was, as I was reading those poems, I noticed that a lot of them deal with love and, Pain and some vivid recollections intermixed with ruined lives.
Pain intermixed with ruined lives.
Where is that coming from?
You know, uh, some of the poems in that book go back quite a long way because some of them
are poems that had been previously published and, uh, of course some of them, uh, a number of them are new poems.
So it's a kind of a documentary of my life and my emotional life, my psychic life all, uh, through, over several years.
Uh, I don't feel pain anymore.
I'm a happy person.
But, you know, we, we, uh, we do have to struggle, uh, to know ourselves and what our identity, uh, happens to be.
And I suppose that through those years I was, I was looking for my, who, who really is Pinkie Lane.
And so this, uh, a lot of it was pain.
You see, a lot of it was pain.
Because I had a, really had a, I had a struggling childhood.
My father was an alcoholic and, uh, it was a dysfunctional family.
I was dealing with this years after he had died, you see.
I came to terms with it, but I think my poetry helped me to do that.
Because a section in the poem, To Your Father, is the one that really I was thinking about the most.
Yes.
When you talk about divorcing your father.
And then there's a poem about an uncle.
Oh, yes, yes.
And both of those were, uh, yes, very painful poems to do.
Well, I see a lot of my poems too come, uh, are rooted in my family.
You know, I'm a, I'm a really a family oriented person.
I have some poems to my son.
Uh, family's important to me.
So I, um, I use a lot of my imagery and a lot of my content comes from, um, my, that kind of association.
But then, you know, I eclectic, I write about everything
. Oh, good.
Yeah.
Good.
I had another couple of questions.
And one of those has to do with the context of this particular conference.
The session this morning dealt with finding the vernacular matrix in African American poetry.
And since you say you're eclectic, which is a good lead in, how do you see yourself fitting in with that notion of
a vernacular tradition, or a vernacular mainstream, or vernacular matrix, rather, between folk and popular poetry?
Um
I guess the only way that my portrait would fit in with the folk tradition would be perhaps my choice of subject matter.
Because I, uh, I'm very much rooted, you know, in my background and rooted in the folk tradition.
But I think in terms of the technique, uh, I'm a, uh, It's, it's, uh, it's, my academic background comes into play.
Uh, I, I, um, I'm an educated person.
And so I write in terms of the language which it has, I have grown, grown into, you see.
And this is why I suppose the metaphor is so important to me.
I did a whole doctoral dissertation on the metaphor.
A 300 page, just on the poetic metaphor.
So when I say, uh, the, the metaphorical image, I'm really talking from the background of, uh, Uh, an intensive amount of study of that art form.
So I'm a mixture of both, you see.
There is the folk there, but there's also the, I guess you'd call it the, sophisticated, uh, uh, uh, tradition that's coming in there.
I'm a mixture of that.
And I make no apologies for that, you know.
I, I, this is what I am.
Well, we certainly aren't asking you to apologize.
We certainly are not.
So you see your work taking place more, less as performance poetry, and more as poetry to be read in university or the classroom setting?
Well, when you say performance, as if so happens, that even right now, there is a violinist, a composer in Baton Rouge.
He used to be the first violinist for Baton Rouge Symphony.
So he's strictly in the classical tradition.
Contemporary classical tradition, who has sent three of my poems to, to music.
And they are going to be performed on October the 19th and the 22nd, in Baton Rouge, in a week that we call Louisiana Heritage Week.
And he has done this before, uh, about eight years, about five years ago.
He, uh, selected three poems.
Those are three love poems.
These poems are all, uh, these three poems are, um, um, uh, He selected the theme of music.
One's called Lyric I'm Looking at Music.
One's called Two Singers of Song, and one's called Violins.
But what he does, you see, he has an orchestra.
He works with graduate students.
So he really has, he's written the parts for the various instruments, string instruments.
And I will just read portions of the poems.
He will give me a nod.
So in that sense, it's performance.
We're gonna perform those three poems.
So I guess you could say I fit into, I mean, you can perform Anything, if you apply the right techniques.
Again, just a different venue, too.
Yes, that's right.
Okay.
How do you see your work?
in relationship to the so called canon in American poetry and also in relationship to the canon in Black American or African
American poetry, particularly in light of the Black Arts Movement of the 1960s.
Yes.
You know, I was telling someone this, that we've been seeing now this morning, um, I
mentioned to the person sitting next to me who happened to be Sybil Kine, I said, you know, I remember once
when we had, we used to have a Black Poetry Festival at Southern every year.
Was that the Melvin Dixon?
Melvin Butler.
Porphyry Festival, and then he died after two years, and I took over the directorship for seven years, and we changed it to his name.
But I remember one of the persons who came to our session was Dudley Randall.
At that time there was a lot of rhetoric about what is black poetry?
What is black poetry?
And, uh, I asked Dudley, you know, I wasn't playing the devil's advocate, I wanted to get his point of view.
He was giving a talk that time.
I says, uh, Dudley, I says, what is your definition of black poetry?
He says, oh, he says, my definition of black poetry is any poetry that's written by a black person.
Now you see, that was a good answer.
It means that he was not being prescriptive, that you must write a certain way.
You know, I'm still writing from my perspective, and I'm, and ethically, you know, I'm writing from the African American perspective, you see.
What about your work vis a vis the American, the broader American?
Oh.
Now, uh, I think in, in terms of the broader America, I, possibly my emphasis on technique.
You see, uh, the persons who have given me a lot of support, uh, in responding to my work have not just been, um, African Americans, you see.
So that tells me that I must be saying something that reaches a broader spectrum to somebody.
Um, I, uh, uh, the fact that I do emphasize technique.
The metaphor, which comes out of a very long tradition, you see.
Fits me into, I think, the larger context, not just of American poetry, but of world poetry.
Mm
hmm.
Mm hmm.
Yet, when I pick up anthologies, the, uh, typical anthologies used in the college classroom, I very seldom see your work represented there.
Well, you know, that, I can't answer to that except that I was kind of late coming on the scene.
You see, I was, uh, when I started writing, really taking poetry seriously, I started writing when I was 17.
But when I really started taking myself seriously as a poet in terms of trying to get something published, I was well out there in teaching, you know.
I was a mature person.
I had a son, you know.
And, um, many of the poets, and then it wasn't that easy for African Americans to get published.
At the time that I was writing, you know.
And it takes a lot, you know, you talk about people who are overnight sensations, but really, if you study
the biography of persons, they've been around for a very long time.
Writing for a very long time.
So, I think that what's happened there is that some of the poets who, uh, uh, got a lot of recognition
that my poetry has not gotten, been writing much longer than I had, maybe.
I don't know.
Or it could be that you need a graduate student to come along and do a dissertation.
That seems to cover a certain amount of status in and of itself.
I have just a couple of more questions.
One of them is What changes have you noted or do you see in the community of writers in the past 20 to 30 years?
If we start with the Black Arts Movement in the 60s and 70s till the 90s, what changes have you, can you observe?
In the Black Arts Movement?
Um.
Just in the community of writers in general.
The community of writers in general.
Well, let's talk about, uh, African American poetry for just a minute.
Uh.
And I want to, really want to start what we call the Cultural Revolution of the late 60s.
Uh, very polemical, uh, very angry, but it came along at a time when we needed that, you know, Black awareness.
Um, some of the poetry was very good, and those poets are still writing, and some of it was not so good.
The changes I've seen, even in the poets who, uh, uh, were very, very, in what we call the protest tradition, have now expanded.
in terms of their vision.
There's still very, there's still a consciousness of the black arts, but there is a wider spectrum of how they deal and how they handle their work.
And there's a, I think there's a wider acceptance of other persons who write in other ways.
The poetry at that time was very prescriptive.
Very prescriptive.
Uh, I remember when, uh, I was, uh, I mentioned the, uh, the, uh, the Elvin Butler Poetry Festival and the, uh, the rhetoric about what is black poetry.
And some of my colleagues were saying, well, your poetry is not black enough, you know.
And I was, uh
It must have hurt.
It hurt.
I remember Margaret Danner, who was one of our, um, came to one of our, um, Conferences.
And she was staying at my house at the time, instead of staying in the hotel.
And I said, Margaret, I said, they said my poetry isn't black enough.
And she said, and then she said something that I never forgot.
She says, look, she says, don't pay any attention to that.
She says, we all have to create our own audience.
You just keep right on being yourself.
What was the best advice that she could ever, anyone could ever have given me?
Because, uh, it's very true.
You can't be anything other than yourself.
And sometimes people have to come, work up to what you're doing.
It's a, uh, it's a, life is a, is a continuum.
t's moving on.
And it could have been that I was ahead of some of those persons who were still, Very prescriptive in what they thought poetry should be.
And some of those same persons now are more accepting, I'm very happy to say.
Okay, so from the 60s you've talked to Dudley Randall, and you've talked to Margaret Danner, and I'm
sure you've talked to Gwendolyn Brooks on a number of occasions.
Who do you talk to now?
Who is a part of the community that helps you keep going when you have a problem in the writing or you want an ear for somebody to listen to a poem?
Well, really no one.
I just listen to my own inner voice.
Okay.
So is that a matter of choice?
Or is that a matter of there is more isolation and less sense of community among the writers?
No, it's not a matter of isolation.
I guess it's a matter of my own sense of purpose and having a little more assurance of myself.
I don't feel that I have to talk to someone else, you know, for endorsement of what I'm doing.
Uh, I'm my own best critic.
I know when something isn't any good, you know.
I write a lot, and only nine, uh, maybe, uh, one percent of what I, goes in my notebook, gets to the printed page.
Because I'm able now to do my own editing.
And say, no, that's not working.
But this is.
Okay.
I want to come back to something really briefly and that is you say that you're an images poet and you'd
like to concentrate on the metaphor and presumably the simile that goes with that.
Yes.
Well, because I use the term metaphor in the metaphor, I'm talking about metaphorical imagery.
Okay.
Which includes all imagery.
It includes, uh, uh, synecdoche, uh, antonomy, uh, the simile.
Uh, uh, all of this is metaphor in terms of comparing one thing with another and coming up with a, you know, a basis of, of, of, uh, of comparison.
Yeah, so I use it, I didn't say metaphor, metaphorical imagery, we use all of it.
Figurative language.
I stand corrected.
Yeah, figurative language.
Okay, I guess my question then had to do with I'm just struck by how brief the lines are all the time and does that mean that that kind, that form
of poetry does not allow for the long flowing sort of paragraph style poetry at all the free verse kind of thing or Is that part of the dictates of that form?
Uh
with me, I suppose And this is going to sound, you're not going to believe this.
But I have a spiral notebook which is about that wide.
And when I get to the end of the line, I start the next line.
So that's how you punctuate lines.
I have always wondered when I try to write poetry.
I guess my questions come out of the fact that my own poems are so long.
I think if I had a notebook that long, probably my technique would be, I'm being facetious now.
But I really think that because of, uh, I'm, I'm capturing a mood for the moment and it's not, and my poetry is not discursive, you see.
I'm, I'm quickly moving from one feeling, one mood, one image to the other and that doesn't call for long lines.
Now if I wrote very long narrative poetry, I think my form would be different.
All to the good.
Thank you, Pinky.
That was very good.
Pleasure to have done this with you.
Uh, Gwendolyn Brooks is being honored here at the Furious Flower Conference and uh, I was remembering that the very
first time I ever saw you read was in the Library of Congress with Robert Hayden and Gwendolyn Brooks.
At uh, which point you read uh, your poem for Gwendolyn Brooks as she was beaming uh, behind you.
Now of course you couldn't see the beam, I don't know, maybe you felt it, but was that the first time you ever read that to her?
Yes, yes it was.
And you know Gwendolyn is responsible for my first book being published.
And she chose my book before she met me, Dear John, Dear Coltrane.
And, um, I owe her plenty, and you know, you can't repay this.
Gwendolyn has been friendly, uh, supportive, and um, a kind of sage, uh, setting the pace for everybody.
And I have done my homework, um, retrospectively, that is to say I've been to see the house she was born in, in Topeka.
And I know some of her relatives who think, and they tell me, you know, one is not the only substantial person in this family.
You ought to come to church on Sunday.
And, you know, they're just correcting people.
They're very solid folks, you know.
So she comes from solid people.
Um, I owe her much more than I can pay her.
And I wrote her a citation for an honorary degree in 1974 at Brown.
And we were going to the luncheon and I escorted Gwendolyn and her husband and her son and daughter.
And I was about to leave and she said, where are you going?
I says, um, I said, I'm not invited to this luncheon.
She says, you know, I don't have to go to this luncheon.
In fact, I don't even have to stay here.
She says, I've had, uh, I've had other honorary degrees.
So I said, well, how many honorary degrees have you had?
She says, oh, about 50.
That was 1970.
I was going to say, it's probably about 150 by now.
Lord.
But then I explained to her that Judge Sirica had been honored because of the Watergate business and everybody wanted to be sitting at lunch with him.
And that what you ought to do is just read a poem.
I'm going to read one because, uh, I love this poem and people always miss reading it.
They don't know how Gwendolyn reads this poem.
So I'm going to read it in her honor.
Furious Flowers, dedicated to her.
And this is Partial Payment.
It's called We Real Cool.
The Pool Players 7 at the Golden Shovel.
We real cool, we left school.
We lurk late, we strike straight.
We sing sin, we thin gin.
We jazz June, we die soon.
It's a great poem.
I, uh, was corresponding with her over the summer.
And, you know, Gwendolyn does all kinds of surprising things.
Just when you think that generosity has reached its level, she just takes it to another level.
That's true.
And, uh, she had been on campus to give a convocation a few years ago, and a lot of students came out, and I was teaching her
poems, and, uh, she had published a collection called Blacks, and the bookstore couldn't get distribution.
That's her collected poems that she keeps expanding.
Yes.
And, uh, we couldn't get copies that would have been in a bookstore, so I wrote to her and said, Listen, we've got this seminar, you know.
Uh, we need books and would you, uh, just arrange or call somebody or whatever or tell me who, who called.
And the next couple of days I got a package in the mail.
Twenty books.
Of Blacks.
And in, in her scrawl, which is distinctive, you know, she writes these things.
I do not want any money for these.
Which meant give them to the students.
Which I did.
So we were reading on Sterling Brown's birthday at the Guggenheim Library.
And I had gone to the
bookbinder in the John Hay Library, who binds books from the 14th, 15th, 16th century, given him a copy of Blacks
and said, I want you to bind this in the best leather that you can find.
And he said, well, you know, it's a paperback book.
I said, do whatever you have to do.
And when I walked up to her on Stirling's birthday, Stirling was, was dead, he had died in 1989, I just handed this to
her and I said, this is in appreciation for all the things you've done for me.
And for the first time that I have seen, she had nothing to say.
Then when it came time to read she said, the highest compliment a poet can pay to another poet is to do what that poet would not do for him or herself.
How many of us are buying our own books in leather?
Well, the only person I knew was Wallace Stevens.
Who did it all the time.
Well, he's, you know, he's working in insurance.
He had an expensive account.
You know, we all know that.
But, uh, Gwendolyn was wonderful.
And I owe her plenty.
She's been a marvelous example.
And not only that, I mean, her generosity is widely known among people.
But more than anything else, what I love is what she does for children and for young folks.
Sure.
Well, when she was Poetry Consultant at the Library of Congress, she was insistent about visiting
the schools in particular, much more so than any of the later Poet Laureates have done until probably Rita Dove.
In fact, I remember, um, That reading was also the occasion when they announced that Robert Hayden was going to be the Poetry Councilman.
Now what a lot of us didn't know at the time was that he'd been offered the position once before, uh, and
because of, uh, Things that having to do with his position at Ann Arbor, it had to turn it down at that point.
But you were sitting between him and Gwendolyn Brooks, who was the next African American, uh, poet laureate and the first African American woman.
I'm not predicting necessarily that you'll be the next one in line or something, but it was a curious situation because along
with Sterling Brown, those are probably two of the most important people in terms of their appearance in your own work.
Absolutely.
I remember hearing you read that poem, and then it wasn't too much longer after that, that, um, that, uh, you did Chant
of Saints, which had a considerable amount of, uh, Robert Hayden work in it as well, along with Sterling Brown.
Um, Let me ask you something about that first book.
You've mentioned several times, uh, during the Furious Flower Conference, uh, Gwendolyn Brooks participation in selecting that for that prize.
When I go back to that book, um, it's striking in retrospect that far more than most poets I read, it seems that, um, most
of the characteristics sort of Michael Harper, Elements are already there.
That is the, your primary thematic sources, history, music, family are the primary sources already.
Uh, and structurally the poems seem already to have found, uh, the major formal methods that you'll use the rest of your life.
Um, it makes me feel a little bit like when Emerson got Whitman's first book and said there must have been a long apprentice.
I was wondering, apprenticeship, I was wondering if you could speak a little bit about the development of that first book.
And how you came to send it off to these audiences.
Well, I was already in my early thirties when that book was published.
And I think that's one of the things.
I came along at a time when most poets did not even think about publishing a book until they were in their late thirties.
And two of my mentors at undergraduate college were both alumni of the Iowa Writers Workshop.
I was aware, for example, that the workshop had a kind of undercurrent of encouragement to black artists
and musicians, because Iowa was graduating PhDs in dentistry and music composition as early as the 1920s.
Now, you could attend a school, but you couldn't get an apartment, unless you lived in student housing, marriage student housing, whatever.
And that's a, that's a whole other story.
Because they've got no convention of black folks living in that town, except, with the exception of athletes.
But, I was lucky enough to have come along at a time.
When, uh, one spent all one's time kind of doing one's own background.
You never expected to get paid.
And I was, all the time I went to undergraduate school, I was working in the post office on Graveyard.
And that meant that I was in the company of people who had PhDs in all kinds of disciplines, but the best job they could get was working in the post office.
So they were constantly keeping me on my toes.
And they used to say, Youngblood, what are you reading now?
And I'd say, I'm reading Dostoevsky.
Oh yes, Dostoevsky.
And then they'd give me a quiz.
I mean, going to school was a picnic in comparison to just working on airmail.
Yeah, I'd be walking around, I'd go through airmail and there was Charles Mingus sister sitting there.
Oh really?
And she'd say, now don't walk around acting like you're a musician.
You know, because I always had a book in my pocket.
You know, and uh, Dexter Gordon and, and, and, Mungus and, uh, Wardell Gray, these were all household names and, and
at that time the Watts local was still going, that is to say a trolley car going to Watts, what they really need now.
Yeah.
You know, in, in L.
A.
as you know, the mass transit problem has just gotten
well, they took the trolleys out of all the American cities.
Of course they did.
And, and, and, and, uh, when I first got to L.
A.
they, they had the Watts, uh, uh, uh, My parents left Brooklyn, New York, where I was born.
You were born in 38?
1938, in order to, uh, in order to save us from gang fighting.
So, of course, we went to L.
A.
The first thing they were doing was bombing black people's homes as, as you crossed the Great Divide.
At that time, the Great Divide was Crenshaw.
Then it became La Brea.
And my dad was working in the post office.
He had transferred out there.
And we were asked to finish school.
We had to finish, you know, at that time I was finishing 8th grade.
And when we came out there, you're talking about trauma, oh Lord, being in L.
A., you know, it was tremendous.
I, in fact, I never recovered.
And, um, a lot of people think that my development is mostly concerned with, uh, being in Los Angeles, but actually, I got all my real good training in
New York and in, you know, I was, I was living in Brooklyn at a time when Brooklyn was a suburb of New York.
You know, that is to say, people lived in, in New York because you could get a commodious house, and, uh, you know, they had streets, uh, tree lined streets.
The street that I was born on, which is called Lafayette Avenue, was chestnut lined, and the hurricane in 1948 blew all those trees down.
You don't think of hurricanes in Brooklyn, do you?
No, you don't, and you don't think of snow either, but we had 26 inches or so in 1947, and my
old man was shoveling snow, and that's why he decided to go to California.
He said, I'm not gonna die in this stoop.
You know, Sheldon Snow.
So I'm an urban type, but I was influenced by music long before.
My parents had good record collections, and I already knew about Parker.
I got to Los Angeles, nobody had ever heard of Charles Parker.
Especially in school, 1951.
Nobody knew this, and for many years.
For example, when the Supreme Court decision came down in 1954, this was not discussed in civics class.
I mean, we had no precedent for the kind of historic dialogue which you would think.
would go on in a, in a quote unquote progressive state.
And the school, the school that I went to was, was a, an anti-earthquake building.
It was, which meant it was one floor.
It was a geometric pattern.
And it was built on land which had been appropriated from Japanese Americans.
It had been a rice field.
During the interment period.
Yeah, during the, so, I mean, it's, it's, you know, you have all of that kind of unwritten, undiagnosed history.
So, that was part of it.
I was not all that young.
And during the Black Arts Movement, When people were publishing magazines and whatever, I was living in San Francisco and I was listening to Coltrane and Art
Blakey and the Jazz Messengers and Horace Silver and listening to Sarah Vaughan Sing and all of that sort of stuff.
So I had a whole repertoire, a whole frame of reference, which is entirely different.
My literary exposure, my literary background, was pretty much an independent thing.
In fact, I taught the first black literature and black history courses because I was in places where there was no precedent for it.
And as an administrator said, well, all you have to do to do black literature is just teach the books, as though there were a lot of them.
You know, I'm talking about anthologies or, well, there weren't.
So I just went and read the original material.
I mean, Gwendolyn Brooks and Hayden and Sterling and Margaret Walker and
Although at that time it was hard to get a Sterling Brown record.
Very much so.
But there was a record that, that they, that Folkways Records had made.
That's true.
So one could hear that.
And I was actually riding on the freeway in San Francisco and I heard a tape.
of, uh, a voice and I said, this is not a West Coast voice and I waited until the end because I didn't, at that time I'd never heard, uh, Sterling except by
record and he was giving a lecture on the Negro, the, the, the Negro character in American literature from the 19th and 20th century and his diagnosis.
His book was one of the first on that subject as well.
Oh, it was, it was, it was unreal.
And to hear him teach, and this was a lecture he gave at Berkeley, University of California, Berkeley.
So, I was lucky in that way, in that I would be, you know, you'd just be driving along and you'd have your FM on, on the educational television.
Next thing you know, educational radio.
Or Pacifica or something.
You're hearing this, yeah.
Pacifica, probably.
So, I've had that.
And also, I did so much of my work in isolation.
Um, I didn't have, when I went to Iowa, for example, as a writer's, in the writer's workshop, uh, My friends were foreign students, and it was a guy from
Ghana who taught me the Anansi stories, and uh, Miriam Akiba came to campus, and I was always the one that they came to get.
I used to wear hats all the time, these great big hats, and they'd say, Padre, you call me.
Yeah, they'd call me Padre.
Padre.
Oh, not hats like this.
Would you have to, you have to go represent us.
And, and I said, what do we have to do now?
He says, well, let's go over to, and we will tell you about it.
And then they would see they didn't have any money, and Mary McKeever would come and give a concert and cost $7 50 cents to get in.
And we couldn't, we couldn't afford that.
Mm-hmm . So I would be sent as Emissary and I went with a bouquet of flowers, knocked on the door, and I welcomed her to campus.
This was in the mid-afternoon and I explained that there were all these football players and basketball players.
Mm-hmm. Random motley people, you know, collected around the jukebox.
And she said, well, where are they?
And I said, down there.
And she says, well, just a minute.
She came down.
And she sang for us 45 minutes a cappella.
Click song all that sort of thing.
So they thought that I had some kind of magical powers I didn't she didn't know what all I had done is say there's some
people that are not gonna be at your concert They would love to hear you sing.
And gave us some flowers.
Well, you know, these are these are patrician people I don't care if they're tribal blacks from South Africa, you know, they got their own tradition.
She was she was magnificent So these little highlights that was the same year that W.
H.
Auden read Well Auden had come to I had been a student of Christopher Isherwood.
Auden had come to Isherwood's class.
Isherwood would bring his friends Charles Lawton came to class and I said, Man, that looks like the hunchback of Notre Dame, boy.
And there he'd come.
You know, and his issue would never say anything.
He would just bring it.
So I read Richard Wright and Langston and people like that who were household names to me because we were all, we subscribed to the Crisis magazine.
And, you know, I used to clip Langston's poems out of the magazines.
Put them on the wall.
So when a person asked me, did I want to be the new Hank Langston Hughes, this was sacrilegious to me.
To be the new Langston?
Yeah.
That's why the old one was still alive.
He's still walking around.
I'm talking to myself, what is wrong with these people?
But that was the only black name they knew.
So they would run.
Still is for a lot of people.
Yeah.
Oh, I get tired of that.
But you know, you're trying not to be insulting because they're making an effort, so I would, in witty fashion, I would say, No, I'm trying to be a W.
B.
Yeats, and they used to take that seriously.
People would write me letters and they'd say, Where'd you get the idea for this poem?
I'd say, Well, I was reading Dante, you know, and they'd write that down.
So now, you know, some of my poems in the Norton Anthology, for example, Nightmare Against Responsibility, Delmore Schwartz.
Well, I don't need those two to write a poem of that sort.
Anybody can just look at the subject matter.
Where'd the technique come from?
I don't sound like Iowa poets.
Well, I was going to ask you about that.
Uh, I haven't seen too much discussion of this, but you don't The structure of your poems isn't like any of the sources you've been talking about.
You seem to, uh, have a sort of phrasal structure that's really unique.
And I was wondering about
got real critical acuity.
I love it.
Well, it's not hard to notice.
A lot of people No, it isn't.
All you've got to do is read it.
But nobody talks about it for some reason.
Yeah.
Well, the answer to the question is, I've tried to put together two different forms.
There is, there's a kind of phrasing that the great musicians, see I grew up with Lester Young, who would go to the Savoy Ballroom and he would play to the dancers.
He would get ideas from watching people dance, and especially on Kitchen Mechanic's Night, which was Thursday
night, when it cost a dollar to get in, and he'd watch these dancers and then he would come up with this phrasing.
So people wanted, where the phrasing comes from, well every musician, uh, every session is a new day.
They don't sound like the solos on the records because that was just one time.
These people are improvising all the time.
And when you got geniuses out there, uh, I said to myself, that's the source.
Now, how to make the bridge from that musical um, linkage to a literary one was always the issue for me.
Now, you could live under the security blanket of the metronome, but that struck me as enormously boring and since Hayden
and Gwendolyn had already done that They'd written beautiful sonnets and ballads and they'd kind of carved out that territory.
There's no point imitating them You know, I was trying to kind of build on what they'd done and it's it struck me
as being You notice how Gwendolyn and Hayden and Sterling were always working against the tradition at the same time.
They were already conversant in it.
But they were adding to it.
In a kind of theory of adaptation.
They'd take elements of it and they'd run with them just to give you a kind of semblance of what they were doing.
And then they would bring other elements to it.
Often times it came from Afro American folklore or Afro American speech patterns and whatever.
And the critics would come along and they would say, Well these people are not conforming to the pattern.
Well they weren't trying to.
They were already conversant in this.
They were really pioneers.
And they were pioneers not only because they were well educated in terms of the nuances and creativity and all that.
They understood the creative process.
And the creative process is always one on one.
And one, no matter what your preparation is, when you're in the act of writing, or when you're in the act of singing, everything depends on that moment.
And the whole weight of one's life and training comes to pass then.
So, That was what I was trying to do.
Well, it also seems, you seem to have solved a problem that a lot of writers, uh, say, post the early modernists have faced.
That's the difficulty of narrative using modernist techniques.
Now, your phrasal structures aren't exactly the sort of collage juxtapositions that you find in a lot of writers.
Somehow you manage to, uh, particularly in your history poems, manage to have a narrative without having narrative style sentences.
And that, again, it's not, you know, what the so called new narrative poets are doing, uh, which is really just going back to a very old form.
Well, if you listen to the solos of the great musicians, or you listen to the phrasing in the great singers, the Sarah Vons and
the Billie Holidays and whatever, these are always people who are looking for the epiphanies in things.
And they turn the whole melody, the whole chordal structure, on just a phrase or two.
And, and the, the, the, um, Exposition, as well as the highlights, turn on these kind of moments.
And that's what I'm trying to do in a certain kind of analogical way.
I'm trying to build into that.
But this is also part of my sensibilities to where I was raised.
It's, it's, it's, it's the kind of, you know, um, Uh, there are, the way in which black Americans talk
particularly in the kitchen, is something which is extraordinary to me because they always telescope complexity.
They'll give you just, um, um, Henderson, Stephen Henderson calls it Mask On.
But, Henderson said to me, I'm using this as an illustration, he said to me a beautiful thing once.
You know, the Coltrane poem is, uh, Dear John, Dear Coltrane, is a poem which has, has been, um, looked at, not only by me, but by others.
And he said to me one day, he said, Were you thinking about Du Bois and Sam Hose at the beginning of that poem?
He's the only person.
That understood the context of the poem.
And it pleased me so.
For him to say that.
And we were just walking across the campus at Howard.
He just came up with that.
So, there's a certain kind of intelligence and a certain kind of literacy, which is not necessarily written
down, which is always in dialogue, because we're always participating in what I call a long dialogue.
That's one of the reasons why the Ellison's and the Hayden's and the Winland's are most important.
We only have a few minutes left, but I wonder if I could ask you one last question in that regard.
Um, you've In your poem about Bessie Smith, you follow exactly that technique.
You take the phrase from the song, Last Affair.
Yes, of course.
And tell the story of her death.
Now, um, many people aren't aware, we were talking about this before, there's a recording of you reading that
poem, uh, but this time accompanied by Ronald Shannon Jackson on drums.
What he seems to do is add to the narrative by playing different kinds of, uh, rhythms, some quite traditional, uh, underneath there.
Um, we only have a couple minutes, but maybe you could just read, uh, I don't know, is that book?
This is called Last Affair, Bessie's blues song.
And the first line of the poem is the medical term for the separation of the shoulder from the torso of the body.
Disarticulated, arm torn out, large veins cross her shoulder intact, her tourniquet, her blood.
In all white big bands.
Can't you see, what love and heartache's done to me?
I'm not the same as I used to be.
This is my last affair.
Mail truck or parked car in the fast lane.
A float at 43 on a Mississippi road.
200 pound muscle on a ham bone.
Another nigger dead before noon.
Can't you see, what love and heartache's done to me?
I'm not the same as I used to be.
This is my last affair.
50 dollar record cut the vein in her neck.
Fool about her money, told her black train wreck.
White press missed his funeral in the same stacked deck.
Can't you see what love and heartache's done to me?
I'm not the same as I used to be.
This is my last affair.
Loved a little black bird, heard she could sing.
Martha in her vineyard, pestle in her spring.
Bessie had a bad mouth, made my chimes ring.
Can't you see what love and heartache's done to me?
I'm not the same as I used to be.
This is my last affair.
Well, until next time, thank you very much, Michael Harper.
Great.